>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 13:
PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD TRUMP
CONTEMPLATES WHO WILL SERVE IN
HIS CABINET AND ON HIS SENIOR
STAFF.
WE'LL LOOK AT WHAT MAKES FOR A
PEACEFUL TRANSITION OF POWER
AND THE FOREIGN POLICY
CHALLENGES FACING THE NEXT
ADMINISTRATION.
ALSO, WILL THE NATIONAL POPULAR
VOTE MOVEMENT GAIN MOMENTUM?
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AS PRESIDENT ELECT DONALD TRUMP
PREPARES TO ASSUME THE OVAL
OFFICE IN TWO MONTHS, TODAY HE
ANNOUNCED THE FIRST MAJOR
APPOINTMENT OF HIS
ADMINISTRATION: WHITE HOUSE
CHIEF OF STAFF.
REINCE PRIEBUS WILL GET THE JOB
ACCORDING TO A STATEMENT ISSUED
BY THE TRUMP TRANSITION TEAM.
HE WAS THE FAVORITE CANDIDATE OF
HOUSE SPEAKER PAUL RYAN AND
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER MITCH
McCONNELL.
THE JOB DOES NOT REQUIRE SENATE
CONFIRMATION.
STEVE BANNON WILL BE NAMED
CHIEF STRATEGIST AND SENIOR
COUNSELOR TO THE PRESIDENT.
TRUMP SAID...
EARLIER TODAY TRANSITION TEAM
VICE CHAIRMAN NEWT GINGRICH, A
POTENTIAL CABINET MEMBER
HIMSELF, SAID MR. TRUMP HAS A
MANDATE TO GOVERN.
>> THEY WON THE HOUSE, THE
SENATE, MOST GOVERNORSHIPS,
MOST IN HISTORY, IF YOU LOOK AT
THE COUNTRY THERE'S CERTAINLY A
SHIFT TOWARDS REPUBLICAN
GOVERNMENT ON A PRETTY BIG
SCALE.
>> TRUMP CAMPAIGN MANAGER
KELLYANN CONWAY, SAID PRESIDENT
OBAMA AND HILLARY CLINTON SHOULD
TELL DEMONSTRATORS THAT,
"THIS MAN IS OUR PRESIDENT."
HOUSE SPEAKER PAUL RYAN SAID,
NOT BEEN DRAFT EVIDENCE YET BUT
HE ENVISIONS A REFUNDABLE TAX
CREDIT A VOUCHER TO HELP PEOPLE
OBTAIN HEALTH INSURANCE.
>> YOU CAN HAVE THIS SYSTEM
WITHOUT A COSTLY TAKEOVER LIKE
OBAMACARE THAT IS MAKE
DEDUCTIBLES SO HIGH, THAT IT
DOESN'T FEEL LIKE YOU HAVE
INSURANCE.
IT MUST BE REPLACED.
>> SPEAKER RYAN ALSO SAID
CONGRESS IS NOT CONTEMPLATING
FUNDS FOR A DEPORTATION FORCE
TO ROUND UP THE ESTIMATED
11 MILLION UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS IN THE UNITED STATES.
BY CONTRAST, MR. TRUMP SAID
IN AN INTERVIEW TO BE
BROADCASTED ON 60 MINUTES, HE
WANTS TO DEPORT OR INCARCERATE
TWO TO THREE MILLION PEOPLE WITH
CRIMINAL RECORDS.
HE MIGHT ACCEPT SLIGHT
MODIFICATIONS TO HIS WALL ALONG
THE MEXICAN BORDER.
>> ARE YOU BUILDING A WALL?
>> YES.
>> THEY ARE TALKING ABOUT A
FENCE IN THE REPUBLICAN
CONGRESS.
WOULD YOU ACCEPT A FENCE?
>> IN CERTAIN AREAS I WOULD.
I'M VERY GOOD AT THIS.
THIS IS CALLED CONSTRUCTION.
IT COULD BE SOME FENCING.
>> FOR MORE ANALYSIS OF THE
PRESIDENTIAL TRANSITION I'M
JOINED FROM SANTA BARBARA BY
JEFF GREENFIELD.
JEFF, MR. TRUMP AND MR. AND
MRS. OBAMA HAVE STRUCK A
GRACIOUS TONE, BUT THIS IS AN
UGLY CAMPAIGN SEASON AND SEEMS
LIKE PASSION IS TAKING A LITTLE
BIT OF A BREAK.
DO YOU THINK IT IS GOING TO BE
THESE PASSIONS AND UGLINESS WILL
BUBBLE UP AGAIN?
>> YOU'RE RIGHT, DONALD TRUMP
AND HILLARY CLINTON HAD GRACIOUS
STATEMENTS BUT OUT GOING SENATE
LEADER, HARRY REID, SAID HE
FUELED HIS CAMPAIGN WITH BIGOTRY
AND HEAT.
KELLYANNE CONWAY SAID THERE
MIGHT BE A LAWSUIT AT THAT ONE.
SAYING THERE'S AN ENEMIES LIST
THAT THEY HAVE AND IT'S ALSO
INTERESTING TO ME THAT THE
TRANSITION MAY GET UGLY OR EVEN
WITHIN THE REPUBLICAN PARTY
BECAUSE OF SOME HARD FEELINGS.
TRUMP HAS REACHED OUT TO SPEAKER
PALM RYAN BUT NEWT GINGRICH IS
SUPPOSED TO PLAY A ROLE IN THIS
BE TRANSITION, PRETTY HARD
FEELINGS NOT JUST BETWEEN
REPUBLICANS AND DEMOCRATS, BUT
EVEN AMONG REPUBLICANS THAT I'M
NOT SURE HAVE QUITE CALLED DOWN
YET.
>> Stewart: WELL IF THE
ADMINISTRATION STARTS TO TAKE
SHAPE AND WE START TO GET CLUES
ABOUT WHO WILL BE IN IMPORTANT
POSITIONS HOW IMPORTANT IS THE
STONE IN TERMS OF BEING
PRODUCTIVE GOING -- TONE IN
TERMS OF BEING PRODUCTIVE GOING
FORWARD AND HAVING AN EFFECTIVE
CABINET?
>> THE CLUE YOU GET ABOUT WHAT
KIND OF ADMINISTRATION THE NEW
PRESIDENT WANTS TO BRING,
THERE'S ALWAYS TENSION BETWEEN
THE CAMPAIGN AND THE SEASONED
INSIDERS ON EITHER SIDE IN
WASHINGTON WHO ARE LOOK TO PLAY
A ROLE.
THAT IS PARTICULARLY TRUE IN
THIS CASE BECAUSE TRUMP'S
CAMPAIGN WAS SO MUCH OF AN
INSURGENT CAMPAIGN.
AND ENDED BOTH PARTIES
CORRUPTION.
>> WHITE HOUSE, REPRESENTATIVES
IN THE SENATE, WOULD YOU THINK
SMOOTH SAILING.
>> WELL REMEMBER, WHEN YOU HEAR
THAT THEY NOW HAVE CONTROL OF
ALL OF THE BRANCHES OF
GOVERNMENT AND PRESUMABLY SOON
WILL HAVE THE SUPREME COURT IN
THE POLITICAL SENSE, THE
QUESTION IS, WHAT AGENDA'S GOING
TO BE PUSHED?
YEAH, THERE ARE CLEARLY GOING TO
BE BIG TAX CUTS, MOST OF WHICH
WILL GO TO THE AFFLUENT, AND
DISMANTLING OF OBAMACARE, SIT
WHOLESALE OR WILL THEY KEEP SOME
OF THE MORE ATTRACTIVE ELEMENTS
OF IT?
IF TRUMP WANTS TO LAUNCH A HUGE
INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, THAT'S
GOT TO BE REPUBLICAN PARTY IS
NOT FOND OF DEFICITS, SO EVEN
IF THEY HAVE CONTROL THEY HAVE
GOT TO FIGURE OUT WHO IS
SPEAKING FOR REPUBLICAN PARTY.
>> Stewart: IF YOU ARE A
REPUBLICAN, DEMOCRAT, LOOKING
AROUND, WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE
FUTURE?
>> IT'S NOT OFTEN APPRECIATED
MAYBE IT IS NOW HOW MUCH A
DISASTER THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY
HAS ENDURED AFTER EIGHT YEARS OF
OBAMA WHO WAS ELECTED TWICE WITH
THE MAJORITY OF THE POPULAR
VOTE.
THEY LOST 11 SENATE SEATS,
UPWARDS OF 60 HOUSE SEATS, THEY
CONTROL STATE GOVERNMENT IN SIX
STATES, THE REPUBLICANS CONTROL
IT IN 24.
THE REPUBLICANS HAVE I THINK
TWO-THIRDS OF THE GOVERNORSHIPS
AND DEMOCRATS HAVE LOST 900
LEGISLATIVE SEATS.
IT'S BEEN A TERRIBLE EIGHT YEARS
FOR DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
THE ONLY HOPE THEY, SINCE THE
MID TERMS HAVE BAD FOR THE PARTY
IN POWER, I SUPPOSE THEY WOULD
TAKE HEART BY WINNING THE
POPULAR VOTE BY 2 MILLION VOTES,
THAT AND A BUCK BUYS YOU A
NEWSPAPER.
>> Stewart: THINGS ARE NOT
NECESSARILY PEACEFUL ON THE
GROUND.
IS IT TIME FOR SOME OF THE
LEADERS ON THE LEFT TO SAY TO
SOME OF THE PROTESTERS, PEACEFUL
PROTEST IS FINE BUT ASSAULTING
OFFICERS AND DAMAGING PROCEED IS
NOT.
IS IT TIME FOR SOMEBODY OFTEN
THE RIGHT TO SAY, YOU KNOW WHAT
WE WON THIS ELECTION BUT THERE
IS NO TIME FOR BIGOTRY AND
HATRED, A PRESIDENT ELECT OR
PRESIDENT COME OUT AND SAY WE
NEED TO BEHAVE BETTER WE NEED TO
BE CIVIL.
>> I THINK BOTH THOSE MESSAGES
WOULD BE VERY HELPFUL.
WHEN PEOPLE ARE BREAKING WINDOWS
IN DOWNTOWN CITIES BECAUSE THEIR
CANDIDATE LOST THE RACE AND THEY
REALLY DON'T LIKE THE NEW
PRESIDENT IT'S KIND OF HARD TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT MESSAGE THAT
SENDS.
YOU KNOW I THINK TRUMP COULD
TAKE A NOTE FROM BOB DOLE, 20
YEARS AGO, IN HIS ACCEPTANCE
SPEECH, ANYBODY SUPPORTING ME,
BIGOTS OR RACISTS, THERE'S THE
DOOR.
IF TRUMP WAS ASKED, CAN SOME OF
HIS LANGUAGE HE REGRETS, HE SAID
NO, I WON.
WHICH SUGGESTS HE REGARDS SOME
OF THE RHETORIC TRANSITIONAL.
IF IT WORKED IT WORKED.
THE FACT HE'S ABOUT TO BECOME
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
WE COULD REALLY USE A SIGN FROM
HIM THAT HE UNDERSTANDS THAT
WHEN A PRESIDENT SPEAKS EVERY
WORD WEIGHS A TON AND THERE'S
GOT TO BE A DISTINCTION BETWEEN
WHAT SOME OF HIS SUPPORTERS
EMBRACE AND WHAT HE REALLY
BELIEVES.
>> JEFF GREENFIELD, THANKS FOR
JOINING US.
>> Stewart: IN IRAQ TODAY,
GOVERNMENT TROOPS SAID THEY
RECAPTURED THE HISTORIC TOWN OF
NIMRUD FROM ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS.
NIMRUD, 20 MILES SOUTH OF MOSUL,
IS CLOSE TO THE SITE OF RUINS
AND ROYAL TOMBS FROM THE ANCIENT
ASSYRIAN EMPIRE DATING BACK
THREE-THOUSAND YEARS.
ISIS HAD SEIZED THE TOWN ALMOST
TWO-AND-A-HALF-YEARS AGO, AND
THEN DESTROYED MUCH OF THE
TREASURED SITE WITH DRILLS AND
EXPLOSIVES.
A COALITION OF FORCES LED BY THE
IRAQI ARMY AND SUPPORTED BY THE
U.S. MILITARY, HAVE BEEN
ADVANCING FOR FOUR WEEKS ON
MOSUL, IRAQ'S SECOND LARGEST
CITY, WHICH ISIS HAS OCCUPIED
SINCE 2014.
COLOMBIA AND MARXIST REBELS ARE
TRYING AGAIN TO FORMALLY END
THEIR 52-YEAR WAR, AFTER THEIR
FIRST ATTEMPT WAS REJECTED BY
VOTERS.
GOVERNMENT NEGOTIATORS SIGNED A
REVISED PEACE AGREEMENT LAST
NIGHT WITH THE REVOLUTIONARY
ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA, KNOWN
AS "FARC," AT A MEETING BROKERED
IN CUBA.
PRESIDENT JUAN MANUEL SANTOS--
WHO WON THIS YEAR'S NOBEL PEACE
PRIZE FOR HIS EFFORTS-- IS NOW
URGING HIS COUNTRY TO UNITE
BEHIND THE AGREEMENT.
COLOMBIANS NARROWLY REJECTED THE
ORIGINAL DEAL IN A REFERENDUM
SIX WEEKS AGO AS TOO LENIENT ON
FARC WHEN IT CAME TO PUNISHMENT
AND REPARATIONS.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT SAID IF
THERE WILL BE ANOTHER
REFERENDUM.
PARTS OF NEW ZEALAND TODAY SAW
OCEAN WAVES UP TO SIX FEET HIGH
AS A RESULT OF A TSUNAMI.
IT WAS TRIGGERED BY A POWERFUL
7.8 MAGNITUDE EARTHQUAKE
CENTERED NEAR THE CITY OF
CHRISTCHURCH ON THE COUNTRY'S
SOUTH ISLAND.
THE QUAKE WAS FELT STRONGLY IN
THE CAPITAL OF WELLINGTON, 120
MILES TO THE NORTH, AND DAMAGED
SOME BUILDINGS THERE.
THE PRIME MINISTER SAYS AT LEAST
TWO PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION IS
VOWING TO HOLD THE TOBACCO
INDUSTRY LIABLE FOR THE HEALTH
CONSEQUENCES OF ITS PRODUCTS.
THIS WEEKEND AT THE TOBACCO
CONTROL SUMMIT IN DELHI, INDIA,
DELEGATES FROM 180 COUNTRIES
ALSO VOWED TO BAN OR CURTAIL THE
SALE OF E-CIGARETTES.
WITH SMOKING-RELATED DEATHS
RISING IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES,
THE W.H.O. ESTIMATES TOBACCO
COULD KILL ONE BILLION PEOPLE
THIS CENTURY UNLESS STRONGER
ACTION IS TAKEN.
THE CONFERENCE ALSO RESOLVED TO
PROMOTE OTHER FORMS OF
LIVELIHOOD FOR TOBACCO FARMERS.
BARACK OBAMA LEAVES TOMORROW FOR
HIS LAST MAJOR OVERSEAS TRIP AS
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
AS HE IS HEADING TO GREECE,
GERMANY AND PERU, EUROPEAN
UNION FOREIGN MINISTERS MET IN
BRUSSELS TODAY TO DISCUSS THE
IMPACT OF THE INCOMING TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION.
NATO SECRETARY GENERAL JENS
STOLTENBERG WROTE IN A NEWSPAPER
ARTICLE THIS WEEKEND THAT QUOTE:
"EUROPEAN LEADERS HAVE ALWAYS
UNDERSTOOD THAT WHEN IT COMES TO
SECURITY, GOING IT ALONE IS NOT
AN OPTION."
PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP'S STATED
POSITIONS ON SECURITY, TRADE,
AND RELATIONS WITH COUNTRIES
LIKE IRAN, ARE A DEPARTURE FROM
THE POLICIES OF THE PAST EIGHT
YEARS UNDER MISTER OBAMA.
JOINING ME NOW FROM BOSTON TO
TAKE A CLOSER LOOK IS "NEW YORK
TIMES" NATIONAL SECURITY
CORRESPONDENT DAVID SANGER.
DAVID, YOU INTERVIEWED WITH YOUR
COLLEAGUE MOLLIE HIBERMAN,
DONALD TRUMP A COUPLE OF TIMES
LAST SPRING, AND HE TALKED ABOUT
FOREIGN POLICY, NATO BEING ONE
OF THEM.
>> HIS VIEW THAT NATO OUGHT TO
BE FOCUSED TOTALLY ON TERRORISM.
HE FEELS IT'S AN OBSOLETE
ORGANIZATION, AND HE SAID NEARLY
NOTHING ABOUT ITS ROLE ABOUT
HELPING TO CONTAIN RUSSIA, ONCE
THE SOVIET UNION.
I ASKED HIM IF SOME OF THE NEWER
MEMBERS OF NATO THAT WERE
PREVIOUSLY SOVIET STATES IF THEY
WERE INVADED WOULD HE COME TO
THEIR DEFENSE WHICH IS REQUIRED
UNDER THE NATO TREATY.
HE SAID FIRST, I WOULD BE CHECK
WHAT THEIR LEVEL OF CONTRIBUTION
HAD BEEN TO NATO.
AND THAT'S QUITE A DEPARTURE,
BECAUSE THE COMMITMENT OF THE
UNITED STATES AND OTHER MEMBERS
HAVE ARE BASICALLY AN ATTACK ON
ONE IS AN ATTACK ON ALL.
THE QUESTION IS, IS THIS A
NEGOTIATING TACTIC OR DOES THIS
INDICATE A FUNDAMENTAL
RETHINKING OF WHAT NATO SHOULD
BE?
>> Stewart: IT'S INTERESTING
ONE OF THE GOALS OF NATO FOR ITS
28 MEMBERS IS THAT EACH WILL
INTEND 2% OF ITS GDP ON DEFENSE
AND AS OF 2015 ONLY FIVE OF THE
28 COUNTRIES HAD DONE SO THE
UNITED STATES BEING ONE OF THEM.
SO IN HIS MIND IS THIS
TRANSACTIONAL, YOU HAVEN'T
CONTRIBUTED AND SO IF YOU ARE
GOING TO DEPEND ON US WE EXPECT
SOMETHING FROM YOU?
>> WELL ALISON I THINK YOU HAVE
GOTTEN TO THE CORE OF WHAT ONE
OF THE BIG DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
THE TRUMP WORLD VIEW AND THE
CONVENTIONAL WORLD VIEW
INCLUDING HIS OWN PARTY'S THAT
IN THE YEARS OR THE DECADES
SINCE WORLD WAR II AND SINCE THE
CREATION OF NATO, MORE THAN 50
YEARS AGO, THE CONCEPT HAS BEEN
THAT ALLIANCES ARE ABOUT MORE
THAN ANY INDIVIDUAL TRANSACTION.
THEY ARE BUILDING A
RELATIONSHIP, BUILDING A EXON
DEFENSE -- A COMMON DEFENSE AND
THAT RELATIONSHIP YOU WORK ON
EACH YEAR AND YOU DON'T KEEP A
STRICT LEDGER BOOK.
HIS VIEW BOTH IN EUROPE AND IN
ASIA IS QUITE DIFFERENT.
IT'S THAT THESE ARE
TRANSACTIONAL RELATIONSHIPS,
THAT IF THE UNITED STATES IS
RUNNING A TRADE DEFICIT WITH A
COUNTRY WHICH IS ALSO PROVIDING
PROTECTION, THAT THAT TRADE
DEFICIT OUGHT TO GET IN LINE, SO
THAT WE ARE NOT LOSING MONEY.
WHEN HE SET THAT HE WOULD BE
WILLING TO PULL AMERICAN TROOPS
OUT OF JAPAN AND SOUTH KOREA, IT
WAS BECAUSE IN HIS VIEW, THEY
WEREN'T PAYING ALL OF THE COST,
THEY PAID JAPAN'S CASE ABOUT
HALF THE COST OF KEEPING TROOPS
THERE.
IT WASN'T A CONCEPT THAT KEEPING
TROOPS FORWARD-DEPLOYED WAS IN
AMERICA'S OWN INTEREST AS WELL
AS IN THE INTEREST OF ITS
ALLIES.
>> Stewart: I WANT TO READ ONE
MORE LINE FROM THAT OP ED THAT
U.N. SECRETARY GENERALLY WROTE,
HE WROTE THIS IS NO TIME TO
QUESTION THE VALUE OF THE
PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN EUROPE AND
THE UNITED STATES.
WHAT'S THE SUBTEXT OF THAT?
ARE WE TALKING ABOUT RUSSIA, ARE
WE TALKING ABOUT SYRIA?
>> I THINK YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
BOTH.
I MEAN RUSSIA WILL BE ONE OF THE
FIRST GREAT TESTS AND IT WILL BE
A TEST IN THE DEBATE OVER NATO
AND IT WILL BE A TEST IN THE
DEBATE OVER SYRIA.
PRESIDENT ELECT TRUMP GAVE AN
INTERVIEW, BRIEF INTERVIEW TO
THE WALL STREET JOURNAL ON
FRIDAY IN WHICH HE SAID THAT HE
WOULD RE-THINK ONE OF THE
FUNDAMENTAL TENETS OF THE
AMERICAN POLICY TOWARDS SYRIA
WHICH HAS BEEN TO HELP ARM AND
TRAIN OPPOSITION GROUPS, TO
PRESIDENT ASSAD.
AND IN MR. TRUMP'S VIEW AND THIS
IS CONSISTENT BACK TO THE
INTERVIEWS WE DID WITH HIM IN
MARCH AND AGAIN IN JULY, THE
UNITED STATES SHOULD NOT BE
TRYING TO KNOCK ASSAD OUT OF
OFFICE, OR EVEN ENCOURAGING A
SITUATION IN WHICH HE WOULD GET
OVERTHROWN, DESPITE THE FACT
THAT HE'S RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
DEATHS OF NEARLY HALF A MILLION
OF HIS OWN CITIZENS.
BECAUSE IN HIS VIEW, THE ONE
GOAL IN THE MIDDLE EAST SHOULD
BE FIGHTING ISIS.
AND IF ASSAD IS ALSO FIGHTING
ISIS WE OUGHT TO GET
TOGETHER WITH HIM AND THE
RUSSIANS.
WHAT WE HAVEN'T HEARD HIM FULLY
EXPLAIN HERE IS, THAT WOULD PUT
US ON THE SAME SIDE OF THE FIGHT
WITH THE IRANIANS AS WELL AND AS
YOU KNOW HE'S GOT PRETTY STRONG
OPINIONS ABOUT IRAN.
>> Stewart: AT ONE POINT DAVID
CANDIDATE TRUMP SAID, DISMANTLE
THE DISASTROUS DEAL WITH IRAN.
HOW COULD HE DO THAT?
>> ONE RAILWAY HE COULD DO THAT
IS SIMPLY ANNOUNCE THAT THE
UNITED STATES WAS REIMPOSING
SANCTION HE IN IRAN, NOTHING IN
THE NUCLEAR SPHERE, IN FACT, THE
IRANIANS HAVE ABIDED TO THE
DEAL, BUT PUTTING SANCTION HE ON
THEM FOR THEIR SUPPORT OF
TERRORISM, FOR THEIR SUPPORT OF
HEZBOLLAH, THEIR ACTION HE IN
SYRIA AND SO FORTH.
IF THEY DID THAT THE IRANIANS
MIGHT SAY HEY LOOK THIS IS NOT
WITHIN THE SPIRIT OF THE
AGREEMENT, YOU TOOK SANCTIONS
THAT WE REMOVED FROM THE NUCLEAR
DEAL AND SIMPLY REIMPOSED THEM
WITH ANOTHER EXCUSE.
THAT'S SOMETHING THE UNITED
STATES SAID IT WOULD NOT DO
DURING THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION.
THAT WOULD PROBABLY SERVE TO
UNRAVEL THE DEAL, THAT IT IS
PROBABLY THE IRANIANS WHO WOULD
DO THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS DOING
THE UNRAVELING IN THAT CASE.
>> Stewart: DAVID SANGER,
THANK YOU FOR YOUR REPORTING.
>> THANK YOU,
>> STEWART: PRESIDENT-ELECT
TRUMP CAPTURED THE WHITE HOUSE
BY WINNING 29 STATES-- 30 IF YOU
COUNT MICHIGAN, WHERE HE'S
AHEAD-- AND THE MOST ELECTORAL
VOTES, AT LEAST 290, 20 MORE
THAN NEEDED.
BUT HILLARY CLINTON WON THE MOST
ACTUAL VOTES NATIONWIDE-- THE
NATIONAL POPULAR VOTE.
SHE'S CURRENTLY AHEAD BY 630-
THOUSAND VOTES, BUT THAT GAP IS
PROJECTED TO DOUBLE WHEN ALL THE
VOTES ARE COUNTED.
LAST WEEK ON THIS BROADCAST, NEW
YORK UNIVERSITY POLITICAL
SCIENCE PROFESSOR JOSHUA TUCKER
SAID THIS:
>> IF TRUMP WINS THE ELECTION,
THERE IS A SMALL BUT NON-TRIVIAL
CHANCE THAT HE WOULD WIN THE
ELECTION WITHOUT HAVING RECEIVED
A MAJORITY OF THE POPULAR VOTE.
WITHOUT EVEN SEEING A PLURALITY.
IF HE WAS ELECTED WHERE HE WON
THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE BUT LOST
THE POPULAR VOTE, I THINK IT
WOULD GIVE A STRONG IMPETUS TO
THIS MOVE TO NATIONAL POPULAR
VOTE
>> Stewart: PROFESSOR TUCKER
JOINS ME NOW FOR FURTHER
DISCUSSION OF THE POPULAR VOTE
VERSUS THE ELECTORAL VOTE.
PROFESSOR IN THAT PIECE WE
TALKED ABOUT A DIFFERENT SYSTEM,
A COMPACT BETWEEN STATES, AS A
WAY TO MAKE THE POPULAR VOTE
COUNT MORE.
CAN YOU HELP US UNDERSTAND THAT
A LITTLE BIT MORE?
>> THE WAY THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE
IS SET UP IS THAT IT IS IN THE
CONSTITUTION THAT THE ELECTORAL
COLLEGE SELECTS THE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES.
HOWEVER, IT'S ALSO IN THE
CONSTITUTION HOW THE ELECTORS
ARE ALLOCATED TO THE STATES.
BUT HOW THE STATES PICK THE
ELECTORS IS STATUTE LAW.
THAT'S NOT SET BY THE
CONSTITUTION, THAT IS SET BY THE
INDIVIDUAL STATES THEMSELVES.
SO NOW WHAT WE IS THIS WINNER
TAKE ALT SYSTEM, 48 OF THE
STATE.
YOU WOULD SEE TRUMP WOULD GET
50% AND CLINTON WOULD GET 50%.
WHAT WE HAVE IN 48 OF THE 50
STATES IS WHOEVER GETS ONE MORE
VOTE THAN ALL OF THE CANDIDATES
GETS ALL OF THE ELECTORS.
WHAT WE WERE TALKING ABOUT LAST
WEEKEND IS A PLAN THAT TRY TO
CHANGE THE WAY THAT STATES
ALLOCATE THEIR ELECTORS AND THE
IDEA WOULD BE TO CHANGE THE
RULES SO THAT STATES WOULD
CHANGE THEIR ELECTORS NOT TO THE
PERSON WHO GOT THE MOST VOTES IN
THEIR STATE BUT TO THE CANDIDATE
THAT GOT THE MOST VOTES
NATIONALLY.
THE STATES HAVE THE POWER TO DO
THAT.
IN FACT, THERE ARE 11 TASTES
THAT HAVE PASSED LAWS TO DO
EXACTLY THIS, CONDITIONED ON THE
FACT THAT ENOUGH OTHER STATES
PASSING THE LAWS THAT WOULD
ALLOW SOME TOTAL OF THE STATES
TO BE 270 OR HIGHER OR ENOUGH TO
ELECT THE PRESIDENT.
>> THIS HAS HAPPENED FOUR TIMES,
TWICE IN THE PAST 16 YEARS.
WHAT HAS THAT TOLD YOU AS A
PROFESSOR OF POLITICAL SCIENCE?
>> I'VE BEEN TEACHING ABOUT THIS
FOR YEARS.
YOU SAY THIS IS A HYPOTHETICAL
POSSIBILITY THAT IN THE 1800S
THIS HAPPENED A NUMBER OF TIMES,
RIGHT?
THAT IT'S A HYPOTHETICAL
POSSIBILITY, YOU COULD
CONCEIVABLY HAVE THIS BUT IT'S
BEEN OVER 100 YEARS THAT THIS
HAPPENED.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT
RESONATES WITH PEOPLE.
THEN AFTER 2000, THERE WAS A LOT
OF TALK, THAT PEOPLE MIGHT WANT
TO CHANGE THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE.
GEORGE BUSH GOT HE ELECTED,
HAVING HALF A MILLION FEWER
VOTES THAN AL GORE.
THIS IS A LIGHTNING SHOT, REALLY
UNLIKELY, SOMETHING THAT HASN'T
HAPPENED FOR 100 YEARS, MAYBE
WOULDN'T HAVE FOR 100 MORE YEARS
AND THE COUNTRY MOVED ON AND
PEOPLE FORGOT ABOUT IT.
THIS IS TWICE IN 16 YEARS AND
MORE IMPORTANTLY IT IS TWICE IN
16 YEARS WITH THE SAME PARTY
BENEFITING.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT LEGITIMACY,
WHEN THIS HAPPENED TO RUTHERFORD
B. HAYES AND IT WAS DECIDED IN
CONGRESS UNDER POLITICAL
CIRCUMSTANCES THAT HE WOULD BE
PRESIDENT, HE WAS REFERRED TO AS
BE FRAUD B. HAYES.
IS THIS SYSTEM ALMOST UNFAIR TO
THE WINNER IN SOME WAYS?
>> THAT'S AN EXCELLENT QUESTION.
AGAIN THIS IS HYPOTHETICAL UNTIL
ABOUT 16 YEARS AGO, DIDN'T SEEM
REAL.
NOW IT SEEMS REAL.
THERE IS ANOTHER ISSUE OF
LEGITIMACY ALSO, THAT THE UNITED
STATES HAS BEEN AT THE FOREFRONT
OF DEMOCRACY PROPOSITION WORLD
OVER.
WE HAVE BEEN OUT THERE TALK
ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE OF HAVING
FREE AND FAIR DEMOCRATIC
ELECTIONS.
NOW WHEN YOU HAVE GOVERNMENTS
THAT WANT TO PUSH BACK AND SAY
HEY WE DON'T NEED THIS FREE AND
FAIR --
>> Stewart: I READ ABOUT THIS,
A TALK POINT IN CHINA TO SAY
LOOK WHAT THE AMERICANS DID.
>> OH YES.
THE ISSUE IS WHEN YOU HAVE
PEOPLE AGITATING OR PUSHING FOR
DEMOCRATIC ELECTIONS IN
COUNTRIES THAT CONTINUE HAVE
THEM, HOLDING UP THE UNITED
STATES AS AN EXAMPLE IT BECOMES
SIMPLER NOW TO SAY WELL YOU'VE
GOT THE UNITED STATES THAT'S A
GREAT EXAMPLE BUT EVEN IN THE
UNITED STATES THE PERSON WHO
GETS THE MOST VOTES DOESN'T WIN
THE COLLECTION.
>> PROFESSOR JOSHUA TUCKER.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK
>> WATCH AN EXTENDED INTERVIEW
WITH JOSH TUCKER ON OUR FACEBOOK
PAGE AT facebook.com/newshour.
>> Stewart: TODAY MARKS ONE YEAR
SINCE THE COORDINATED ATTACK IN
PARIS CARRIED OUT BY ISLAMIC
TERRORISTS who KILLED 130 PEOPLE
AND WOUNDED MORE THAN 400.
THE VICTIMS HAD BEEN ENJOYING A
FRIDAY NIGHT OUT IN CAFES,
RESTAURANTS, ATTENDING A SOCCER
MATCH AND MOST GRIEVOUSLY, IN A
CONCERT HALL.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: ONLY THE DAMPENED
SOUND OF THEIR FOOTSTEPS AND THE
SHUTTER CLICKS OF CAMERAS COULD
BE HEARD AS FRENCH PRESIDENT
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE AND PARIS
MAYOR ANNE HIDALGO APPROACHED
THE BATACLAN CONCERT HALL.
THEY UNVEILED A PLAQUE WITH THE
NAMES OF THE 90 VICTIMS KILLED
INSIDE, THE QUIET INTERRUPTED
ONLY AS EACH VICTIM'S NAME WAS
READ ALOUD.
AFTER A MOMENT OF SILENCE LAST
NIGHT, ROCK STAR STING REOPENED
THE BATACLAN WITH A SOMBER
PERFORMANCE BEFORE AN AUDIENCE
OF 1,000 PEOPLE.
VICTIM'S FAMILY MEMBERS ATTENDED
FOR FREE.
THIS WEEKEND'S MEMORIALS BEGAN
FRIDAY IN THE SAME PLACE WHERE
THE ATTACKS HAD BEGUN-- AT
FRANCE'S NATIONAL SOCCER
STADIUM.
THERE WAS A MOMENT OF SILENCE
BEFORE FRANCE'S MATCH AGAINST
THE SWEDISH NATIONAL TEAM.
TODAY, PRESIDENT HOLLANDE AND
MAYOR HIDALGO UNVEILED MEMORIAL
PLAQUES AT THE FIVE CAFES AND
RESTAURANTS TOUCHED BY THE
CARNAGE.
WHILE PEOPLE LAID FLOWERS AND
LIT CANDLES IN FRONT OF THE
BATACLAN IN MEMORY OF THOSE WHO
DIED.
THE U.S. ROCK BAND THAT HAD BEEN
PLAYING AT THE BATACLAN WHEN
GUNMEN STORMED THE HALL ATTENDED
A CEREMONY AT THE TOWN HALL IN
PARIS'S 11th DISTRICT, WHERE
MOST OF THE ATTACKS OCCURRED ONE
YEAR AGO TODAY.
>> Stewart: AND FINALLY
TONIGHT, ROCK 'N' ROLL HALL OF
FAMER LIEN E-s LEON RUSSELL
HAS DIED.
GOSPEL INFUSED SOUTHERN BOOGIE,
HE WORKED WITH FRANK SINATRA AND
THE ROLLING STONES.
ELTON JONES CALLED HIM HIS
BIGGEST INFLUENCE.
HE WAS 74.
THAT IS ALL FOR PBS NewsHOUR
WEEKEND, I'M ALISON STEWART,
GOOD NIGHT.